The word computer once meant a person who did computations, but now it almost always refers to automated electronic devices. Computers can do much more than calculate, however. They are now used in all sorts of ways to better control or automate products and processes. For example, computers are used in airplanes and automobiles to control the way that fuel is injected into the engine, and they are used to monitor every part of the production process in most modern factories. Computers help people write reports, draw pictures, and keep track of information. Since the invention of the Internet, computers are also used to gather information from digital libraries located all over the world, to send and receive electronic messages (e-mail), and to work, shop, and bank from home. 
Computers come in many sizes and shapes. They range from small devices that perform one specific function, such as those in cameras that control the shutter speed, to supercomputers. Supercomputers are specially engineered to be able to perform trillions of operations per second. Because they are so powerful and therefore so expensive they are generally used only by government agencies and large research centers. 
Parts of a Computer System. 
A computer system requires both hardware and software. Hardware includes all of the mechanical parts of a computer. Software consists of the instructions and data that the hardware uses to perform its tasks. 
Hardware. 
All computers, no matter how large or small, have basically the same types of hardware. These include a central processing unit (CPU), memory, storage (secondary memory), input/output (I/O) devices, and some type of telecommunication device. 
The CPU is the computer's 'brain,' where all computations are performed. The computer carries out its computations one step at a time, with each step occurring on each 'beat' of its built-in clock. The fastest computer clocks now beat more than 3 GHz (gigahertz), or billions of times per second.
Memory is where instructions and data are held while being worked on. Read-only memory (ROM) is built into the computer and cannot be changed. ROM contains instructions that the computer needs to start up. Random-access memory (RAM), or one of its variants, is typically used for the main computer memory because of its speed. Information is stored temporarily in RAM as a computer processes data and instructions. 
Secondary memory is where instructions and data are saved for long-term storage. Most computers use a magnetic device called a hard drive for storage. A hard drive accesses data very quickly. Slower devices are often used to store files on magnetic tape or optical discs such as compact discs (CDs) and digital video discs (DVDs). 
I/O devices enable communication between a computer and the person using it. Input devices allow the user to enter data or commands for processing by the CPU. They include the keyboard, mouse, joystick, scanner, and digital tablet. Output devices let the user see or hear the results of the computer's data processing. They include the monitor, printer, and speakers. 
Telecommunication devices enable computers to send data through telephone lines or other channels. In this way computer users can exchange information with one another. These devices include regular telephone modems, digital subscriber line (DSL) telephone modems, cable modems, and various wireless modems. 
