In one of his letters to a young painter, Cezanne had advised him to look at nature in terms of spheres, cones and cylinders. He presumably meant that he should always keep these basic solid shapes in mind when organizing his pictures. But Picasso and his friends decided to take this advice literally. I suppose that they reasoned somewhat like this: ‘We have long given up claiming that we represent things as they appear to our eyes. That was a will-o’-the-wisp which it is useless to pursue. We do not want to fix on the canvas the imaginary impression of a fleeting moment. Let us follow Cezanne’s example, and build up the picture of our motifs as solidly and enduringly as we can. Why not be consistent and accept the fact that our real aim is rather to construct something, rather than to copy something? If we think of an object, let us say a violin, it does not appear before the eye of our mind the way it would appear before our bodily eyes. We can, and in fact do, think of its various aspects at the same time. Some of them stand out so clearly that we feel we can touch them and handle them; others are somehow blurred. And this strange medley of images represents more of the “real” violin than any single snapshot or meticulous painting could ever contain.’ This, I suppose, was the reasoning which led to such paintings as Picasso’s still life of a violin, figure 374. In some respects, it represents a return to what we have called Egyptian principles, in which an object was drawn from the angle from which its characteristic form came out most clearly.

The scroll and one peg are seen from the side as we imagine them when we think of a violin. The sound-holes, on the other hand, are seen as from in front--they would not be visible from the side. The curve of the rim is greatly exaggerated, as we are apt to over-estimate the steepness of such curves when thinking of the feeling it gives us to run our hands along the sides of such an instrument. The bow and strings float somewhere in space; the strings even occur twice, once related to the front view, once towards the volute. Despite this jumble of unconnected forms--and there are more than I have enumerated--the picture does not really look messy. The reason is that the artist has constructed his picture out of more or less uniform parts so that the whole presents an appearance of consistency comparable to such works of primitive art as the American totem pole. 
