The birth began in a young star. A young star is a mass of hydrogen nuclei. Because the star is hot (about thirteen million degrees at the center), the nuclei cannot hold on to their electrons. The electrons wander around. The nuclei of hydrogen--that is, the protons--are moving about very fast too. From time to time one proton runs headlong into another. When this happens, one of the protons loses its electric charge and changes into a neutron. The pair then cling together as a single nucleus of heavy hydrogen. This nucleus will in time capture another proton. Now there is a nucleus with two protons and one neutron, called light helium. When two of these nuclei smash into each other, two protons are expelled in the process. This creates a nucleus of helium with two protons and two neutrons. 
This is the fundamental process of fusion by which the primitive hydrogen of the universe is built up into a new basic material, helium. In this process, energy is given off in the form of heat and light that make the stars shine. It is the first stage in the birth of the heavier atoms. 
After billions of years, the star, now no longer young, has a central core of almost pure helium. The helium nuclei begin to run into one another headlong. Every so often two helium nuclei crash together to form a nucleus of four protons four neutrons. This is called a beryllium-8 nucleus. It is not the stable beryllium that we know on earth, which has another neutron is called beryllium-9. Beryllium-8 is an unstable isotope that has a fantastically short life flies apart almost as soon as it is formed--less than a millionth of a millionth of a second. Only if another helium nucleus crashes into the table beryllium nucleus in the brief moment its life do the parts remain together and form sew stable nucleus of six protons and six neutrons. 
This is the moment when a carbon nucleus truly born. The atom of carbon whose story are telling was born by this extraordinary chance billions of years ago. 
How, then, does the carbon atom get out of star and come here to earth? The aging star goes on building up carbon atoms and other heavier atoms from its helium. Finally these nuclear reactions stop. The star collapses, the temperature rises suddenly, and the star explodes, scattering the carbon and other atoms through space. There they become mixed with the dust and thin sea of hydrogen gas which fill space. 
Later when a fresh star begins to form from hydrogen gas and dust, it catches up some the carbon and other atoms with it. There fresh stars being formed like this all the time, and one of these fresh stars is the sun, which was formed four or five billion years ago. 
Later the earth and the other planets were formed from the sun. The carbon atom was part of the earth when it was formed. 
The carbon atom has been part of many different things, dead and alive, since the earth began. It has joined with other atoms, broken away, and then joined other atoms again. But always it has remained the same carbon atom. 
At one time the carbon atom may have been part of a diamond--a pure crystal of carbon. Or it may have joined with two atoms of oxygen to form the gas carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide may have entered through the pores of a leaf and been used to make sugar when the sunlight struck it there. The sugar became part of the tissues of the plant.
That plant may have become peat or coal. When the plant died and fell to the ground, bacteria broke some of it down into simpler chemical substances--ammonia, water, and carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide may have escaped into the air and been used again by other plants. But most of the carbon in the plant tissue remained in the ground. With other dead plants around it, the plant got pressed down by layers of sand, mud, and water that settled on it. Over millions of years the plants changed and hardened until they became hard coal, deep in the ground. 
The carbon atom may have been locked in the coal for millions of years. But one day it was dug out of the earth. When the coal was burned, the carbon atom joined the oxygen again and formed carbon dioxide. The next time it entered through the pores of a leaf into a plant, it was used again to make sugar. The plant was perhaps eaten by a cow. One of your forefathers may have drunk the milk of that cow or eaten a steak from it, and the carbon atom might have been in either. 
In the body of your forefather the carbon atom became part of one of the chromosomes which was passed on to your parents and then to you. 
You may pass this carbon atom to a son or daughter. Or perhaps you will die with this carbon atom still in your body. But the career of the carbon atom is not over. It will return to the soil and from there it may get into the air again as carbon dioxide and pass in and out of the lungs of human beings for thousands of years.
The air in a man's lungs at any moment contains 10,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 atoms, so sooner or later every one of us breathes an atom that has been breathed by someone who has lived before us--perhaps Michelangelo or George Washington or Moses! Your carbon atom, linked with atoms of oxygen, may be breathed by some great man or woman of the future. Then it may return again to the soil and lie dormant in some mineral for millions of years. And in time its cycle of life may begin again. 
Will this cycle ever end? We do not know. Your carbon atom has been unchanged, as an atom, for four billion years or more, and there is no reason why it should not go on forever. Even if the earth is burned up at last by the sun, your carbon atom may go back into space and be swept again into some new star.
In a star, and only in a star, will its identity finally disappear. It will be broken apart by violent atomic collisions and its pieces built into other atoms. Then, and only then, will the career of your carbon atom be at an end. But it will be part of new atoms of a different kind. And in this sense it will go on forever--a never-ending link between you and the stars. 

