By the 1870s, public schools had been established throughout the United States, During the next fifty years, however, there was a movement toward more schooling for more students. In part, this was a result of the development of public high schools. Although such schools had existed since the early nineteenth century, they began to enroll a significant proportion of young people only at the turn of the century. In 1890, 4 percent of the nation’s youth between fourteen and seventeen years of age enrolled in school, a figure that rose by 1930 to 47 percent. Reflecting the realization that schooling was an alternative to early employment, the social worker Florence Kelley observed that the most effective compulsory education law was a child labor law. By 1918, all states had some form of compulsory school attendance. 
At the same time that schooling was being extended upward, it was moving downward to encompass more and more young children. Never constant, the age of school entry declined as kindergartens were being added to an increasing number of school systems. Developed by the Prussian educator Friedrich Froebel, kindergartens were intended to teach children between the ages of thee and seven to work, to cooperate with one another, and to appreciate the spiritual unity of all things. Kindergartens spread rapidly in the United States, Initially operating under private auspices, the first kindergarten that was part of a public school system was opened by Susan Blow in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1873; more than four thousand kindergartens were in operation by 1898. Acceptance of the idea of early childhood education programs was encouraged by such influential American educators as the psychologist G. Stanley Hall, who was a critical figure in the child study movement that began in the 1890s, and the psychologist and philosopher John Dewey, whose early writings focused attention on the need to organize schools in harmony with the interests and capacities of children. At a time of significant immigration and heightened concern with urban poverty, early childhood education became a favorite project of many philanthropic organizations and social settlements. 
