The ancestors of today's southeastern Indian peoples constructed many mounds out of the earth. These were used as tombs, temples, and chiefs' houses. Some of the mounds were very large, requiring the coordinated labor of many tribe members. Remember that this was a time well before the invention of any kind of vehicle, let alone construction vehicles: The mounds were built with literally--basketloads of soil! 

Mounds were constructed by the peoples of several distinctive cultures whose existence spanned many centuries. For example, Louisiana's Poverty Point culture of 1000-100 B.C. erected some of the oldest known mounds in the Southeast. Another period of major mound building, from 200 B.C. to A.D. 500, witnessed the construction of conical burial mounds throughout the Southeast. The last important mound-building culture (about 1000-1600), known as Mississippian, lived in large towns along river floodplains and formed huge, flat-topped mounds. 

About 2,800 years ago, at a place in northeastern Louisiana called Poverty Point, a group of Indians developed a complex society and trade center on the floodplain of the Mississippi River. These Indians established long distance trading networks. They sought steatite from Georgia and Alabama, galena from Missouri, copper from the Great Lakes, and diverse stones from Alabama, Tennessee, Kentucky, Ohio, Indiana, Arkansas, and Mississippi. These raw materials were made into cups, bowls, smoking pipes, and beads and other ornaments to wear. 

The Poverty Point Indians were great craftsmen and engineers. They created a collection of mounds whose outlines formed the shape of a giant bird. It is a striking effigy, parts of which still can be seen today. The bird measures 640 by 700 feet and has outspread wings whose central mound stands 70 feet tall. It is connected to three smaller mounds and six concentric low ridges that were arranged in a crescent shape surrounding a curve of the Mississippi River. Millions of cubic feet of earth more than two-thirds of a mile long--were moved to build the latter. What purpose this construction served still is not clear today. 

Later mounds were used as tombs for the dead. After the death of a very important member of the group, such as a warrior, elder, or religious leader, the person was placed in a pit or tomb made of logs. Sometimes, the burial structure was burned and covered over with earth. As additional significant people died, they were put on top of the original mound. Slowly, these mounds turned into hills of earth that sometimes joined other, similar mounds. 

At the height of the Mississippian culture, around the years 1100-1250, hundreds of towns and smaller settlements covered the Southeast. But by 1400, many of the great ceremonial centers, including Moundville, were in a decline. Perhaps the large populations of these Indian cultures depleted the soils and forests, thus reducing their food and building supplies. 

But there is quite a legacy from these diverse ancient people who engineered the enormous mounds we can still see today to honor their leaders and loved ones. 
