Concrete arrives at a construction site as a soupy mixture of Portland cement, aggregate, and water which, by chemical accretion, will harden into a solid mass as hard as stone. On some projects small amounts are mixed right on the spot. 

It can be formed or cast into almost any shape. The aggregate--sand and crushed stone or gravel--is added to the mixture to give more volume. Portland cement is a combination of limestone and clay, ground to very fine powder and heated in a kiln to drive out the moisture. 

Chemicals and other materials can be added to give special properties to the concrete: for waterproofing, for insulation, to make a lighter, more porous concrete, or to affect the drying time. 

The ingredients in concrete are proportioned for specific uses. In the foundation of a skyscraper there is more sand and stone in the mix than cement. In the upper structure of the building more cement is used and less aggregate, since this allows the support columns and other parts of the building to be thinner, or reduced in bulk, without losing strength. 

The amount of water in the mix is also carefully controlled--just enough to ensure maximum hardening, yet a sufficient amount to keep the concrete fluid and workable as it is poured and formed at the job site. Concrete however, requires and additional ingredient to make high-rise construction practical. 

Steel reinforcing bars--some are 2-1/4 inches in diameter and weigh 13.6 pounds per foot--are embedded in the concrete. When tied in clusters, or woven into a mesh of wires and bars, the steel bars give the hardened concrete the strength to withstand any vertical stress and strain as well as horizontal pressure. 

The protruding ends of the steel bars seen at all concrete construction sites are for the connection of this reinforcement, by which a freshly formed concrete section is solidly bonded to the metal reinforcing of the rest of the concrete building. The bars must be placed in the areas of maximum tensile stress as determined by the engineers.
