If you asked modern scientists to name the worldOs greatest achievements in genetic engineering, you might be surprised by one of their low-tech answers: maize.
Scientists know that maize, called "corn" in the United States, was created more than 6,000 years ago. Although exactly how this well-know plant was invented is still a mystery, they do know where it was invented--in the narrow "waist" of southern Mexico. This jumble of mountains, beaches, wet tropical forests, and dry plains is the most ecologically diverse part of Mesoamerica. Today it is the home of more than a dozen different Indian groups, but the human history of these hills and valleys stretches far into the past.
From Hunting to Gathering to Farming.
About 11,500 years ago a group of Paleoindians was living in caves in what is now the Mexican state of Puebla. These people were hunters, but they did not bring down mastodons and mammoths. Those huge species were already extinct. Now and then they even feasted on giant turtles (which were probably a lot easier to catch than the fast-moving deer and rabbits.)
Over the next 2,000 years, though, game animals grew scarce. Maybe the people of the area had been too successful at hunting. Maybe, as the climate grew slowly hotter and drier, the grasslands where the animals lived shrank, and so the animal populations shrank, as well. Perhaps the situation was a combination of these two reasons. Whatever the explanation, hunters of Puebla and the neighboring state of Oaxaca turned to plants for more of their food.
Their lives--and their diets--were shaped by the rhythm of the seasons. For most of the year, individual families lived by themselves, moving from place to place. During the winter, they hunted. In spring and fall, they gathered seeds and fruits. By summer, one of their favorite foods--cactus leaves--was plentiful enough to feed larger groups. With enough food available, 25 or 30 people might gather in a band to spend the season together.
Meanwhile the people kept learning about their environment. They discovered that the thick-leaved, cactus-like agave plants could be eaten if they were first roasted over a fire. They found a way to make acorns into nutritious food: grind them into powder, then soak the powder in water and let it dry. Along the way, people might have noticed the seed they threw into the garbage one year would sprout as new plants the next year. At some point, they started to intentionally scatter seed, so that they would have food to gather during the next growing season. They were practicing agriculture.
This happened in many places across southern Mexico. People began to grow food crops that are still harvested across Mesoamerica toady--squash, gourds, and peppers. Then came maize. 
