At Giza, a few miles north of Saqqara, sit three great pyramids, each named for the king--or Pharaoh--during whose reign it was built. No other buildings are so well known, yet the first sight of them sitting in their field is breathtaking. When you walk among them, you walk in a place made for giants. They seem too large to have been made by human beings, too perfect to have been formed by nature, and when the sun is overhead, not solid enough to be attached to the sand. In the minutes before sunrise, they are the color of faded roses, and when the last rays of the desert sun touch them, they turn to amber. But whatever the light, their broad proportions, the beauty of the limestone, and the care with which it is fitted into place create three unforgettable works of art. 
What do we learn about art when we look at the pyramids? 
First, when all of the things that go into a work--its components--complement one another, they create and object that has a certain spirit, and we can call that spirit harmony. The pyramids are harmonious because limestone, a warm, quiet material, is a cordial companion for a simple, logical, pleasing shape. In fact, the stone and the shape are so comfortable with each other that the pyramids seem inevitable--as though they were bound to have the form, color, and texture that they do have. 
The pyramids also show us that simple things must be made with care. The fine workmanship that went into the building of the pyramids is part of their beauty. Complicated shapes may conceal poor work--such shapes distract our eye--but in something as simple as a pyramid, there is no way to hide its flaws. Because any flaw would mar its beauty, the craftsmanship must be perfect. 
Finally, pyramids show us that light helps to shape our feelings about art. As the sun moves above the desert, the pyramids seem to change. As they do, our feelings about them also change. In the early morning they sit squarely on the horizon and we feel that they have become the kings for which they were named; by midday they have become restless and change into silver-white clouds; and at dusk they settle down and regain their power. 
The pyramids will always work their magic on us. Their forms, so simple and reasonable, and their great size lift us high above the ordinary moments in our lives. 
