
Sung to the tune of "The Times They Are A-Changin'": 
Come gather 'round, math phobes,
Wherever you roam
And admit that the cosmos
Around you has grown
And accept it that soon
You won't know what's worth knowin'
Until Einstein to you
Becomes clearer.
So you'd better start listenin'
Or you'll drift cold and lone
For the cosmos is weird, gettin' weirder.
--The Editors (with apologies to Bob Dylan).
Cosmology has always been weird. Worlds resting on the backs of turtles, matter and energy coming into existence out of much less than thin air. And now, just when you'd gotten familiar, if hot really comfortable, with the idea of a big bang, along comes something new to worry about. A mysterious and universal pressure pervades all of space and acts against the cosmic gravity that has tried to drag the universe back together ever since the big bang. On top of that, "negative gravity" has forced the expansion of the universe to accelerate exponentially, and cosmic gravity is losing the tug-of-war. 
For these and similarly mind-warping ideas in twentieth-century physics, just blame Albert Einstein. 
Einstein hardly ever set foot in the laboratory; he didn't test phenomena or use elaborate equipment. He was a theorist who perfected the "thought experiment," in which you engage nature through your imagination, inventing a situation or a model and then working out the consequences of some physical principle. 
If--as was the case for Einstein--a physicist's model is intended to represent the entire universe, then manipulating the model should be tantamount to manipulating the universe itself. Observers and experimentalists can then go out and look for the phenomena predicted by that model. If the model is flawed, or if the theorists make a mistake in their calculations, the observers will detect a mismatch between the model's predictions and the way things happen in the real universe. That's the first cue to try again, either by adjusting the old model or by creating a new one. 
One of the most powerful and far-reaching theoretical models ever devised is Einstein's theory of general relativity, published in 1916 as "The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity" and refined in 1917 in "Cosmological Considerations in the General Theory of Relativity." Together, the papers outline the relevant mathematical details of how everything in the universe moves under the influence of gravity. Every few years, laboratory scientists devise ever more precise experiments to test the theory, only to extend the envelope of its accuracy. 
