Several factors conspired at Philadelphia to produce a precisely proportioned House. The very novelty of the House of Representatives offered a clean slate on which to draft.  In individual states, any rationalistic reapportionment proposal had to overcome established usages and entrenched interests of lawmakers and the localities they represented.  No comparably entrenched federal apportionment system existed.... 
The result ... was a clever combination of New World wheels and gadgets.  Less than twenty years after the famous American clockmaker David Rittenhouse unveiled his mechanical "orrery" modeling the precise dimensions of the solar system in motion, the Philadelphia delegates offered their own constitutional clockwork designed to make the American House replicate in miniature the movements of the American people in macro. The proposed machinery of regular elections, regular enumerations, and regular reapportionments based solely on population exemplified eighteenth century innovation at its best. 
"three fifths" 
And also at its worst. 
Let’s begin with two tiny puzzles posed by the Article I command that "Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned among the several States... by adding to the whole Number of free Persons... three fifths of all other Persons." First, although this language specified the apportionment formula "among the several states," it failed to specify the formula within each state. ....
A second small puzzle: why did Article I peg the number of representatives to the underlying number of persons, instead of the underlying number of eligible voters, a la New York? 
These two small problems, centering on the seemingly innocent words "among" and "Persons" quickly spiral out into the most vicious words of the apportionment clause: "adding three fifths of all other persons." Other persons here meant other than free persons--that is, slaves. Thus, the more slaves a given state’s master class bred or bought, the more seats the state could claim in Congress, for every decade in perpetuity. 
The Philadelphia draftsmen camouflaged this ugly point as best they could, euphemistically avoiding the S-word and simultaneously introducing the T-word--taxes--into the equation (Representatives and direct Taxes shall be apportioned...). 
The full import of the camouflaged clause eluded many readers in the late 1780s. In the wake of two decades of debate about taxation and burdens under the empire and confederation, many Founding-era Americans confronting the clause focused on taxation rather than on representation. Some Northern critics grumbled that three-fifths should have been five-fifths so as to oblige the South to pay more taxes, without noticing that five-fifths would have also enabled the South to gain more House seats. 
Modern laypersons and law students confronting the words, "three fifths" for the first time often suffer a similar confusion, recoiling at the idea of valuing slaves at less than 100 percent. This initial reaction misses the point. The clause did not mean to apportion how much a slave was a person as opposed to chattel. Had this been the question, the antislavery answer in the 1780s would have been to value slaves fully: five-fifths. Yet in the context of House apportionment, a five-fifths formula would not have freed a single slave, or endowed any bondsman with more rights of personhood against his master or the world. Five-fifths would simply have given slave states even more voting power vis-a-vis free states. The precise Article I question concerned Congress’s proportions, not the slaves’. The principled antislavery answer to this question in 1787 was that for legislative apportionment purposes, slaves should be valued not at five-fifths, or even three-fifths, but rather at zero-fifths. 
