Since ancient times, people have tried to discover the basic units of matter. What, they have asked, are the smallest particles from which all the objects in the universe are made?
Many people in ancient Greece thought that all matter was made of various combinations of four basic "elements"--earth, fire, air, and water. But one Greek philosopher, Democritus (c.460Dc.370 B.C.), had a different theory. He suggested that matter was composed of tiny particles called atoms. The word "atom" comes from a Greek word meaning "unable to be cut" or "indivisible."
The theory of Democritus was largely ignored for 2,000 years. Then, in 1802, an English chemist and physicist named John Dalton (1766D1844) revived the atomic theory. He was the first scientist to define the atom as it is understood today--the smallest particle of an element that behaves chemically like that element.
Atomic physics is the study of atoms and their behavior. Atoms are incredibly small. A tiny speck of dust contains many millions of atoms. Some molecules, such as certain of the protein molecules, contain hundreds of thousands of atoms. Yet a protein molecule is so small, compared with things we can see with the unaided eye, that a powerful electron microscope is needed to view it. Even then, the individual atoms cannot usually be seen.
Small as the atom is, however, it is not the smallest component of matter. Particle physics is the study of the smallest, most elemental building blocks and the basic forces of nature.
Inside the Atom.
Beginning in the late 1890s, scientists discovered that the atom is composed of still smaller particles. The first of these subatomic particles to be discovered was the electron. Then it was found that the atom has a central core, which was named the nucleus. Surrounding the nucleus are the electrons.
The nucleus of the simplest atom, that of ordinary hydrogen, consists of a single particle, the proton. A single electron moves around the nucleus. A heavier nucleus, such as that of an oxygen or an iron atom, contains two kinds of particles: protons and neutrons. Neutrons are about the same size as protons. Electrons are much smaller than protons and neutrons.
By the 1930s, the basic structure of matter seemed almost completely understood. Scientists had established that electrons, protons, and neutrons are the chief components of an atom. But since that time, several hundred other particles have been discovered. In some cases, the existence of these particles was predicted on the basis of complicated theories. The particles themselves were later detected during experiments. In other cases, the particles were discovered first.
Physicists presented new theories to try to make sense out of the chaos of particles that had been detected. One theory gained favor. It states that particles such as protons and neutrons are not elementary at all, but are themselves made up of even smaller units, called quarks. This theory has revolutionized the picture of the elementary particles. Many physicists now think that quarks and a second group of particles--the leptons, which include electrons--are the fundamental building blocks of nature. Yet quarks never appear alone--only in groups of two or three, forming composite particles. Understanding why is one of many challenges in the field of particle physics. Some recent theories and discoveries are described in greater detail in the article Particle Physics. This article focuses mainly on the properties of subatomic particles and the principles that seem to govern their behavior.
Particles of subatomic size can be observed only indirectly, because they are too minute and move far too rapidly to be seen. But physicists can determine how particles interact and how they are affected by electrical and magnetic forces. Scientists can detect new particles that form as existing particles decay or react with each other. In this way, they have learned a great deal about the nature of various particles. 
