
Archimedes and Practically Infinite Numbers.

There is a fundamental property of numbers named after the Greek mathematician Archimedes which states that any number, no matter how huge, can be exceeded by adding together sufficiently many of any smaller number, no matter how tiny. Though obvious in principle, the consequences are sometimes resisted, as they were by the student of mine who maintained that human hair just didn't grow in miles per hour. Unfortunately, the nanoseconds used up in a simple computer operation do add up to lengthy bottlenecks on intractable problems, many of which would require millennia to solve in general. It takes some getting accustomed to the fact that the minuscule times and distances of microphysics as well as the vastness of astronomical phenomena share the dimensions of our human world. 
It's clear how the above property of numbers led to Archimedes' famous pronouncement that given a fulcrum, a long enough lever, and a place to stand, he alone could physically lift the earth. An awareness of the additivity of small quantities is lacking in innumerates, who don't seem to believe that their little aerosol cans of hairspray could play any role in the depletion of the ozone layer of the atmosphere, or that their individual automobile contributes anything to the problem of acid rain. 
The pyramids, impressive as they are, were built a stone at a time over a period very much shorter than the five thousand to ten thousand years required to move the 12,000-foot Mount Fuji by truck. A similar but more classic calculation of this type was made by Archimedes, who estimated the number of grains of sand needed to fill up the earth and heavens. Though he didn't have exponential notation, he invented something comparable, and his calculations were essentially equivalent to the following. 
Interpreting "the earth and heavens" to be a sphere about the earth, we observe that the number of grains of sand needed to fill it depends on the radius of the sphere and the coarseness of the sand. Assuming there are fifteen grains per linear inch, there are 15 x 15 per planar inch and 15 [to the] 3 [rd power] grains per cubic inch. Since there are twelve inches per foot, there are 12 [to the] 3 [rd power] cubic inches per cubic foot and thus 15 [to the] 3 [rd power] x 12 [to the] 3 [rd power] grains per cubic foot. Similarly, there are 153 x 123 x 5,2803 grains per cubic mile. Since the formula for the volume of a sphere is 4/3 x pi x the cube of the radius, the number of grains of sand needed to fill a sphere of radius one trillion miles (approximately Archimedes' estimate) is 4/3 x pi x 1,000,000,000,0003 x 15 [to the] 3 [rd power] x 12 [to the] 3 [rd power] x 5,2803. This equals approximately 10 [to the] 54 [th power] grains of sand.
There is a sense of power connected with such calculations which is hard to explain but which somehow involves a mental encompassing of the world. A more modern version is the calculation of the approximate number of subatomic bits that would fill up the universe. This number plays the role of "practical infinity" for computer problems which are solvable but only theoretically.
The size of the universe is, to be a little generous, a sphere about 40 billion light-years in diameter. To be even more generous and also to simplify the rough calculation, assume it's a cube 40 billion light-years on a side. Protons and neutrons are about 10-12 centimeters in diameter. The Archimedean question computer scientist Donald Knuth poses is how many little cubes 10-13 centimeters in diameter (1/10 the diameter of these nucleons) would fit into the universe. An easy calculation shows the number to be less than 10 [to the] 125 [th power]. Thus, even if a computer the size of the universe had working parts that were smaller than nucleons, it would contain fewer than 10 [to the] 125 [th power] such parts, and thus computations on problems which require more parts wouldn't be possible. Perhaps surprisingly, there are many such problems, some of them quite ordinary and of practical importance. 
A comparably tiny time unit is the amount of time required for light, which travels at 300,000 kilometers per second, to traverse the length of one of the above tiny cubes, whose edges are 10 [to the] -13 [th power] centimeters. Taking the universe to be about 15 billion years old, we determine that fewer than 10 [to the] 42 [nd power] such time units have passed since the beginning of time. Thus, any computer calculation which requires more than 10 [to the] 42 [nd power] steps (each of which is certainly going to require more time than our unit of time) requires more time than the present history of this universe. Again, there are many such problems. 
Taking a human being to be spherical and about a meter in diameter (assume a person is squatting), we end with some biologically revealing comparisons that are somewhat easier to visualize. The size of a human cell is to that of a person as a person's size s to that of Rhode Island. Likewise, a virus is to a person as a person is to the earth; an atom is to a person as a person is to the earth's orbit around the sun; and a proton is to a person as a person is to the distance to Alpha Centauri. 
