In case you forgot, you're still in that time-and-space capsule, but you're not a baby anymore. You're 10 years old and able to work the controls yourself. So get going; we want to head northwest, to the very edge of the land, to the region that will be the states of Washington and Oregon. The time? We were in the 13th century; let's try the 14th century for this visit. 
Life is easy for the Indians here in the Northwest near the great ocean. They are affluent Americans. For them the world is bountiful: the rivers hold salmon and sturgeon; the ocean is full of seals, whales, fish, and shellfish; the woods are swarming with game animals. And there are berries and nuts and wild roots to be gathered. They are not farmers. They don't need to farm. 
Those Americans go to sea in giant canoes; some are 60 feet long. (How long is your bedroom? Your schoolroom?) Using stone tools and fire, Indians of the Northwest cut down gigantic fir trees and hollow out the logs to make their boats. The trees tower 200 feet and are 10 feet across at the base. There are so many of them, so close together, with a tangle of undergrowth, that it is sometimes hard for hunters to get through the forest. Tall as these trees are, there are not as big as the redwoods that grow in a vast forest to the south (in the land that will become California). 
These Native Americans carve animal and human figures on tall fir poles, called 'totem poles.' The poles are painted and are symbols of a family's power and rank. The Indians' totem poles are colorful, but rough; finer poles will be carved after the Europeans come and bring metal knives. 
Because food and wood are so easy to gather, the Northwest Indians have much leisure time. Their lives are full of playacting, dancing, and singing. In times of celebration, relatives and friends come from far villages. They beat drums made of animal skins that have been heated near a fire then stretched taut across a frame of birch. These people of the coastal forests gather in circles and dance and sing of the fish and animals they will hunt. They also sing of their ancestors, and of their fears and hopes, and they pray to the animals for forgiveness and for good luck in the hunt. Sometimes they have wrestling contests. Often they wrestle just for fun. Sometimes the best wrestler gets to marry a special girl. 
Many Americans elsewhere in North America live in communities where almost everything is shared--sometimes even leadership. That is not true here. These Indians care about wealth, property, and prestige (press-TEEJ--it means 'importance and reputation'). They value private property, and they pass their property on to their children and grandchildren. They own slaves and sometimes go to war with other Indians just to capture slaves. People are not treated as equals in this society. They are divided into ranks, or classes. There are slaves, commoners, and nobles. In times of strife, many of the men become warriors and wear wooden helmets and wood slat armor. 

